Korath Exile and Kor Efret hails (#8036)
endless-sky/endless-sky: data/korath/korath hails.txt

		"alaref ratunufeb krop'"        # shunt-strike turret
		"oamapnref alaref i'akiqaln"    # banisher grav-turret
		"ratlaomet akavre' i'akiqaln"   # expeler grav-ray
		"alaref matnrareb masol"        # warder anti-missile
		"akavre' tahfuk iba"            # fire-lance
		"nraseb nrag latahlek"          # blaze-pike turret
		"alaref ataler"                 # [korath] inferno turret
		"le'am ranrahfakleb"            # digger mining beam
		"alaref ranrahfakleb"           # digger mining turret
		"mebaket enralnam"              # langrage hyper-heaver
		"masol iba ranril"              # firelight missile
		"masol iba rabuk"               # firestorm torpedo
		"lodromeb rabuk iba"            # firestorm battery

phrase "exile: semi-translated engines"
	word
		"nrulusreb ovaf"                # forward thrusters
		"nrulusreb timahlek"            # reverse thrusters
		"latahfeb 'alet"                # afterburners
		"kev isofet"                    # steering
		"ri'ef"                         # engines
		"talennreb lo'oh"               # bow drive

		"tusters"                       # thrusters (mispronounced)
		"injuns"                        # engines (mispronounced)

> 		"tearing"                       # steering (mispronounced)

Reviewer: I think "tearing" has too much of a different connotation to be used as a mispronunciation of steering.

Author: I'm changing it to "s'earing" in my next push.

		"abaleheh ukle'rut uhu"              # several oboe concertos
		"nrokab 'islo'ha tikerit"            # kinetic absurdist sculpture
		"ralito ivanlen lebip 'ik'imael"     # hyper-realistic chainsaw carving
		"nrokab ranravrameket tiulep"        # heroic nudity sculpting
		"nrokab tulah nrag 'ifaris"          # dynamic boroque sculpture
		"nrokab ire' parak 'irlesuf-k'ub"    # post-modernist land art sculpture
		"agan ra'itom ef'irui'elbfi talk'ha" # abstract impressionism painting style
		"lekaek tikimub ti'amtuer rlesuf"    # modern neoclassical political theatre
		"i'tolk'rutelef aiseffud ekla'mmes"  # reconstructed (as in recovered from loss) commedia dell'arte
		"aile'ife' alebu pasrilek"           # the most beautiful opera semiseria
		"railak jikakelblekri inumuluekef"   # meteorological interpretive dance

phrase "efreti: artistic or musical skill"
	word
		"ranicfapekes riafpeb unnev"         # cello playing skills
		"kasab mmab fopt"                    # bass drumming talent
		"kasab abok lrad paon amaib"         # terrific tuba talent
		"imimucfus ruummabapkrus lrad siparef"  # catchy contrabassoon composition

> 		"raidradr rasupullrek ainulruf"      # Mongolian throat singing

Reviewer: I think "Mongolian" could be a little too specific, just throat singing might be better, however it could be left alone since it's another language and could just be wrote off as being a random place the korath have and only really matters in the context of text files.

Author: Actually, they also mention Inuit throat singing. Throat singing has different genres; each culture does it differently.

Author: I corrected the name of the genre in the document; it should be khoomei. (Well, actually Khöömei, but we have to stick to 7 bit ascii.) Also, eefing is in there now.

Reviewer 2: That's extra awesome because I'm a fan of khooomei :-D

		"Osa rahimas atac bimar"            # I pity the fate of
		"Adam ikafsiref mkitah ipat"        # I enjoy the death of
		"Rassowrok raparebes pihsapek ataces" # [I] show [the] final truth to
		"Sititref inabfes ralret mapes"     # [I] violently reeducate
		"Rasipebfef akriv raps asakecanaf" # [I] give love-taps of doom [to]
		"Kahafef lratro-lratro lranok ipat" # [I] sculpt bone statues out of
		"Adam satik asotpeb"                # I do not mourn

phrase "exile: people who offend, attack, or oppress me"
	word
		"rahlut rapalafet aga' nrag lareh"  # victims of my righteous rage
		"atelef nrag ohlegref kinram"       # those who invade {our|the} {sky | star system}
		"rimavlek ranres otraa'a'okobet"    # [people who are] entwined with my despair
		"pavavreb asi'uren akit"            # our genocidal invaders
		"atelef nrag rata pavavref akit"    # those who would colonize {us|our home}
		"rafadra inah bosip aga'"           # [people who are] threats to my life
		"aofe' nralu pusuh abrak kimot"     # all skinless fools [who threaten us]
		"kapavreb ranres ikap 'e"           # villains with hearts of ice
		"Humanika nrag tasik jikalebuut"    # uncooperative humans

> 		"kagaf bosip is Nraol Alah"         # {walking corpses|helpless victims} in Ember Space

Author: I saw much worse things than this come out of the cipher. There were many words I had to manually correct to avoid obscene or otherwise objectionable content.

		"raa'aonreb ire' tahferef"              # mastery of the art of shooting
		"ramibfaleket nrikumib nrag laom a'aih" # superb piloting skills
		"ratnrahfenref kahu tikuihikra"         # developing antibiotic medicine
		"pakar pergerakan armada humanika"      # human fleet movement expert
		"i'irtek Nu'agel"                       # nutrigel technician (Nu'agel = Nutrigel)
		"i'iktalb kacaleb 'inumukafles"         # dermatological nurse practitioner
		"racalave' Drak ras 'imarauti'b"        # Drak historian and psychoanalyst
		"impa ati'ijulk'a 'ikeluek"             # theoretical astrophysicist
		"ikimereb nriflujallek 'ikeluek"        # theoretical terraforming researcher
		"impa paseh afoalk"                     # trauma surgeon
		"ratanereb i'rei'ije anarek avlet"      # labor efficiency enforcement
		"rakaohfeb rarataf rakaoh Nu'agel"      # Nutrigel artificial food creation (ie. fake meat & veggies)

phrase "efreti: practical skill"
	word
		"rasiabpec rat rakagapec rimef"         # engine repair and maintenance
		"ranicfapekes lrikunic lrad paon amaib" # superb piloting skills
		"raslrabfelref kabu sikuibikra"         # developing antibiotic medicine

> 		"Quarg i'afumbis ras rapafevlek"        # Quarg diplomacy and translation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"Kuwaru i'afumbis ras rapafevlek"        # Quarg diplomacy and translation
```

# Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Endless Sky is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
# WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
# PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
# this program. If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

# This is a derived work from Lia Gerty's documents.
#
# The words in this file were "translated" to korath languages using
# the methodology described at the top of this PR:
#
#    https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky/pull/7101
#
# Guidance on food, culture, etc. comes from the Korath lore document.

# Phrases begin with one of these:
#
# "efreti:"         = Kor Efret language phrase
# "exile:"          = Korath Exile language phrase
# "exile humanika:" = severely mispronounced human phrases spoken by Korath Exiles
# "exile mixed:"    = contains a mix of Exile and mispronounced human words.
#
# The Exiles can speak a smattering of human words learned from raids,

> # though they lack any knowledge of grammar since their is vastly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# though they lack any knowledge of grammar since theirs is vastly
```

# different than ours. They can demand cargo or ask you not to gas

> # them, but they can't communicate complex concepts, so the language

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# them, but they can't communicate complex concepts; the language
```

	phrase
		"exile mixed: You will give us"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile mixed: food"
		"exile mixed: raw materials"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile mixed: and we will let you live."

phrase "exile humanika: oddly specific demands"
	phrase
		"exile humanika: You will give us"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: cultural items" 2
		"exile humanika: strange items"
		"exile humanika: open source games"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: and we will let you live."

phrase "exile mixed: bragging about tech"
	phrase
		"exile: Our ship's"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: weapons"  7
		"exile: engines"  5
		"exile: systems"  5
		"exile humanika: systems"  12
		"exile humanika: engines"  12
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: [system] is snazzy"  7
		"exile: [system] is better than yours" 4
	word
		.
		.
		.
		!

phrase "exile mixed: request for mercy"
	phrase
		"exile: Our ship is disabled."
		"exile: Our systems went haywire."
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile mixed: Please don't do terrible things to us while we are disabled."

phrase "exile humanika: You will lose this fight."
	word
		"Yu loose lif here."              # You [will] lose your life here. (mispronounced)

> 		"Die yuu nuw if no surendr."      # Die you now if no surendr. (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: Removing temporal reference

```suggestion
		"Die yuu if no surendr."          # Die you now if no surendr. (mispronounced)
```

> 		"Die yuu nuw if no surendr."      # Die you now if no surendr. (mispronounced)

Author: The problem with ignoring the spell checker is that I miss my accidental misspellings.

	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: are superior to what you possess"
		"exile humanika: are above par by any reasonable standards"
	phrase
		"exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"
		"exile: empty phrase"
	word
		"."

phrase "exile humanika: Your ship or its contents or attributes"
	word
		"Yer ship"           # Your ship (mispronounced)
		"Yoo"                # You (mispronounced)
		"Yer injuns"         # Your engines (mispronounced)
		"Yu wepuns"          # Your weapons (mispronounced)
		"'oo gen'rator"      # Your [power] generator (mispronounced)
		"Dem ship"           # Them ship (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: Our ship or its contents or attributes"
	word
		"Are ship"           # Our ship (mispronounced)
		"Wee"                # We (mispronounced)
		"Mi injuns"          # My engines (mispronounced)
		"Oar wepuns"         # Our weapons (mispronounced)
		"Ere pasa core"      # Our plasma core (mispronounced)
		"Mi ship"            # My ship (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: are sub-par by any reasonable standards"
	word
		"'s no gud"          # is no good (mispronounced)
		"baad"               # bad (mispronounced)

> 		"be dren"            # is dren (mispronounced)

Author: It is now `"be sit"             # is [epithet for fecal matter] (mispronounced)`

	word
		"les ours"           # [is] less [than] ours (mispronounced)
		"smalrn oars"        # [is] smaller than ours (mispronounced)
		"week thin me"       # [is] weaker than me (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: are superior to what you possess"
	word
		"be'ren yurs"        # [is] better than yours (mispronounced)
		"bigger yers"        # [is] bigger than yours (mispronounced)
		"ston thin you"      # [is] stronger than [you|yours] (mispronounced)

phrase "exile: empty phrase"
	word
		""

phrase "exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"
	word
		", "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: you inferior species"
		"exile humanika: you inferior individual"

phrase "exile humanika: you inferior species"
	word
		"yuu beeg apes"       # You big apes (mispronounced)
		"humanika dren"       # human dren (mispronounced)
		"ugli munkys"         # ugly monkeys (mispronounced)
		"weeeeek speeeces"    # weak species (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: you inferior individual"
	word
		"yoo ugli foo"        # You ugly fool (mispronounced)
		"skinlis munky"       # Skinless monkey (mispronounced)
		"ugli halching"       # Ugly hatchling (mispronounced)

> 		"frellin' copse"      # Frelling corpse (mispronounced)

Author: Ah, I see you missed the third one: `"weeeeek speeeces"    # weak species (mispronounced)`

> 		"frellin' copse"      # Frelling corpse (mispronounced)

Author: It is  now `"yer've humpd corp's" # you have performed an [epithet for having performed an act of procreation] with a corpse (mispronounced)`

> 		"frellin' copse"      # Frelling corpse (mispronounced)

Author: I went with "humping corpses" because desecrating the bodies of the dead would be one of the most horrible crimes imaginable to a species that relies on the skin of their dead ancestors to pass knowledge to later generations. This would be, by Korath standards, quite an extreme insult.

		"Yor"                    # Your (mispronounced)
		"Te"                     # The (mispronounced)
		"A' of our"              # All of your (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: is ours now."
	word
		"blong to 's."           # belong to us (mispronounced)
		"giv mine."              # give mine (mispronounced)
		"arrr ows now."          # are ours now (mispronounced)
		"ar b'long to us."       # are belong to us (mispronounced)

phrase "exile: You will give us"
	word
		"Asra rata ilehfef ifat"     # You will give us
		"Ifat kokroref asra"         # We demand your
		"Itimif aofe' oftimif"       # [We now] own all of your
		"Kohelef ranraneb poreb"     # [We are] seizing a full [cargo] hold of
		"Ratileh ifat aofe'"         # Give us all [of your]
		"Ratomlebis tokro mihfanref" # [It is] necessary to take [your]
		"Pakrileb rapakleh bosip nrag akit mihfa" # [Our] survival dictates we take

phrase "exile mixed: You will give us"
	phrase
		"exile: You will give us" 2
		"exile humanika: You will give us"

phrase "exile mixed: food"
	phrase
		"exile: good food" 2
		"exile humanika: non-luxury foodstuffs"

# Wish list food, probably half joking
phrase "exile: good food"
	word

> 		"asame' oavip aok lane'"       # fresh dark green lettuce

Reviewer 2: Adding some squid and space slug (based off IRL sea slug) dishes

```suggestion
		"ukku'il ifod"                 # squid risotto
		"roafal ras iahad ifod"        # herb and chili calamari
		"ak'ab akrik ifod-ifod"        # squid ink pasta
		"ifod nrelun"                  # fried calamari
		"ko'ibnraol ranres egralu"     # space slug with orange
		"bipad ko'ibnraol nrilet"      # dried space slug chips
		"asame' oavip aok lane'"       # fresh dark green lettuce
```

		"nrahfot tasah pagrel"         # crunchy rhino beetles
		"ilehulk' lane' nrag nrakaf"   # ripe succulent strawberries
		"sud nrannrab ranres nracah pikob" # baked cod with garlic
		"kemmij emu' nrannrab"         # baked sole fillet
		"'ah koam imipd"               # Chilean Sea Bass
		"rati is 'aka 'aklet"          # fish en papillote
		"rumef rohfe osaf"             # honeydew melons

> 		"meba ak'eb nrag pagrel"       # crisp gala apples
> 		"oham nrirot nradrid 'omap"    # finely chopped yellow squash
> 		"ica' oavip kolab"             # shredded collard greens
> 		"kamo bosip nrag kaimennref"   # live squirming mealworms
> 		"totnrafe' aqlam nridad nramen" # a bowlful of hornworm larvae
> 		"polome' irumut kofe'"         # an entire ant colony
> 		"ratobfok la'eh nridad rimim"  # a big heaping pile of waxworms
> 		"nrala' lomek nroloh akro"     # a nest of ostrich eggs

Reviewer 2: Deleting four items from each list to show some variation between the two cultures and compensate for the six I added.

```suggestion
		"oham nrirot nradrid 'omap"    # finely chopped yellow squash
		"ica' oavip kolab"             # shredded collard greens
		"totnrafe' aqlam nridad nramen" # a bowlful of hornworm larvae
		"polome' irumut kofe'"         # an entire ant colony
```

		"raimleh arlobfe'"               # perfect diamonds
		"afim pomob kemab anahfek"       # fifty palettes of copper
		"rabab ogat 'alet"               # hardwood planks
		"'okale' melah li'ab rakaoh"     # a hundred barrels of manufactured sand
		"avah maloktolk' ma'af"          # bulk structural steel
		"ehokurar ruhlat ifama"          # naturally [formed] carbon nanotubes
		"ralahfem karuhlatimub"          # polycarbonate sheets

phrase "exile mixed: and we will let you live."
	phrase
		"exile: and we will let you live." 2
		"exile humanika: and we will let you live."

phrase "exile humanika: and we will let you live."
	word
		"lat 'oo liff."                   # let you live (mispronounced)
		"oo go frie."                     # you go free (mispronounced)
		"n't oo die."                     # not you die (mispronounced)
		"oo stai ali'f."                  # you stay alive (mispronounced)
		"wee go o o way."                 # we go [our own way|away] (mispronounced)
		"wee go way."                     # we go away (mispronounced)
		"uu keep ur skin"                 # you will keep your skin (mispronounced)

> 		"u see morrow"                    # you [will] see tomorrow (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: Avoid temporal references.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: Is the "avoid temporal references" a cultural/society thing; or could this be adjusted to something less specific?

As far as that goes, I agree it should be less specific. "u see later" or "u see in time"

That being said, could the Korath simply be miscinstruing the word tpmorrow as meaning "future"?

Reviewer 2: Because of their transmitted memory and short individual lifespan, Korath do not have the same relationship to time as we do.  I've suggested on a couple occasions that one of the quirks I'd like to see in their speech is always using the present tense.  When it comes to words they're crudely appropriating from other languages, indications of time are not going to be in their vocabulary.

Author: I think I've removed all time references from the file. If I missed any, please let me know.

phrase "exile: and we will let you live."
	word
		"'amahfef asra ranres ranro'nramet bosip."   # [we will] reward you with survival.
		"ofat rata kapim tu'eh."         # you will see tomorrow.
		"rata anavref kimot asra."       # [you] will keep your skin.
		"imahfet et ofanlaomet."         # [we will let you] return to your family.
		"ratagalef ranro'nramet bosip asra."   # [you can] celebrate your survival

# Attempt at demanding what they need so you understand. Korath know
# very few words and don't know our grammar at all, so it doesn't come
# out right.

# Non-luxury foods
phrase "exile humanika: non-luxury foodstuffs"
	word
		# General terms for food have a high probability
		"fuud"         2             # food (mispronounced)
		"f'oood"       2             # food (mispronounced)
		"fude"         2             # food (mispronounced)
		"foo'de"       2             # food (mispronounced)

		# Terms for categories of food have a high probability

> 		"frute"        2             # fruit (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: Fish is particularly important to Exiles.

```suggestion
		"feeshs"       2             # fish (mispronounced)
		"frute"        2             # fruit (mispronounced)
```

		"musik'l instr'mats"       # Musical instruments (mispronounced)
		"dr'm set"                 # Drum set (mispronounced)
		"Mosart musaic"            # Mozart music (mispronounced)
		"tess set's"               # chess sets (mispronounced)
		"fingre paint'n k't"       # finger-painting kit (mispronounced)
		"all yer operas"           # all of your operas (mispronounced)
		"sonettes n haukus"        # sonnets and haikus (mispronounced)
		"color'd pencals"          # colored pencils (mispronounced)
		"buulk fabr'c"             # bulk fabric (mispronounced)
		"strang instraments"       # string instruments (mispronounced)
		"rok gittar"               # rock guitar (mispronounced)

# These are items that make you wonder what strange things happen
# among the Korath that make them ask for this.
phrase "exile humanika: strange items"
	word
		"kit'ns"                   # Kittens (are these for eating?)  (mispronounced)
		"Hoy ac'rn cookees"        # The best cookies in the galaxy: Hai acorn cookies (mispronounced)
		"toilat pepper"            # Toilet paper (why don't they use a bidet?) (mispronounced)
		"geko"                     # Gecko (a pet?) (mispronounced)

> 		"Dunduns un Dagons"        # I'll let you guess this one (mispronounced)

Author: Dungeons and Sheragi, maybe?

> 		"Dunduns un Dagons"        # I'll let you guess this one (mispronounced)

Author: It is now `"Dundons n Sheragi"        # Dungeons and Sheragi (mispronounced)`

> 		"Bondl's Fontr'z: tee Korath Spantion" # Boundless Frontiers: the Korath Expansion (mispronounced)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Probably should just go ahead and not draw direct attention to the same named for a species being used in another space video game, especially with it not being the only reference in here.

Author: I'm going with "Boundless Frontiers: the Fire Lizards"

Author: This isn't another space video game. It is Endless Sky's parody of itself. I'm merely expanding the self-referential humor.

Author: Boundless Frontiers is part of the Republic's cover story to hide the Hai. It is unlikely that they'd use the actual name of another species they want to hide (Korath) so Fire Lizards makes more sense here.

		"Ter Mite Bee Riot Abums"  # There Might Be Riots Albums (mispronounced)
		"How tu Serv Man buuk"     # The book, "How to Serve Man" (mispronounced)
		"ganfadder clok"           # grandfather clock (mispronounced)
		"bored games"              # board games (mispronounced)

> # The Exiles like to play other open source games. These are horribly

Author: They are now spelled out.

> # The Exiles like to play other open source games. These are horribly

Author: If I get more requests to take these out entirely (accompanied by justifications) then I'll do so.

	phrase
		"exile: We or our ship"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: ain't doing so well right now."

phrase "exile: Our systems went haywire."
	phrase
		"exile: Our malfunctioning system"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: has destroyed our ship."

phrase "exile: Our malfunctioning system"
	phrase
		"exile: Our ship's"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: engines"  9
		"exile humanika: systems"  9
		"exile: engines"  4
		"exile: systems"  4
		"exile: weapons"  4

phrase "exile: Our ship's"
	word
		"Akit"                # Our
		"Mabat iri"           # This ship's
		"Ot"                  # My
		"Oki"                 # The

# These outfit names are just supposed to be good enough for hails.
# If we were to rename the outfits, the names should be finely
# crafted after wide-spread review.

phrase "exile: weapons"
	word
		"mihfa etilk' kellok"           # grab-strike turret
		"alaref ratunufeb krop'"        # shunt-strike turret
		"oamapnref alaref i'akiqaln"    # banisher grav-turret
		"ratlaomet akavre' i'akiqaln"   # expeler grav-ray
		"alaref matnrareb masol"        # warder anti-missile
		"akavre' tahfuk iba"            # fire-lance
		"nraseb nrag latahlek"          # blaze-pike turret

> 		"alaref ataler"                 # [korath] inferno turret

Reviewer 2: Korath is deliberately included in the Inferno.

```suggestion
		"korath alaref ataler"          # korath inferno turret
```

		"le'am ranrahfakleb"            # digger mining beam
		"alaref ranrahfakleb"           # digger mining turret
		"mebaket enralnam"              # langrage hyper-heaver
		"masol iba ranril"              # firelight missile
		"masol iba rabuk"               # firestorm torpedo

> 		"lodromeb rabuk iba"            # firestorm battery

Author: I'm removing the battery.

phrase "exile: engines"
	word
		"nrulusreb ovaf"                # forward thrusters
		"nrulusreb timahlek"            # reverse thrusters
		"latahfeb 'alet"                # afterburners
		"kev isofet"                    # steering
		"ri'ef"                         # engines
		"talennreb lo'oh"               # bow drive

phrase "exile humanika: engines"
	word
		"tusters"                       # thrusters (mispronounced)
		"injuns"                        # engines (mispronounced)

> 		"s'earing"                       # steering (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"s'earing"                      # steering (mispronounced)
```

		"Vicato 'emamo ferornno"                    # My soul always awaits
		"Tomik 'aga feralit 'aga te"                # My skin draws me to
		"Kerkorga 'aga asamap luki orkot ferduha"   # Surely I was bred to
		"Hanaifara 'aga kisat ferduha"              # How can I not try
		"'aga atar femeba'tar Nu'agel orkot"        # I'd give up Nutrigel for
		"Helamip veri' temafir atar helr"           # Switching genders would be worth

phrase "efreti: I like to"
	word
		"Mada sevartoar"                            # I'm addicted to
		"Sebahaliaar abati tiabatisar tanaf"        # Eternal bliss is enshrined in
		"Serisfakar kepkirlli tacak tikefosar"      # Supreme enjoyment can be found in
		"Kitas asar ceprah ata vosoc"               # There can never be enough
		"Wigaso menano ferorllo"                    # My soul always awaits
		"Sonik mada ferapis mada se"                # My skin draws me to
		"Kerkorda mada atanah puki orkos fervuba"   # Surely I was bred to
		"Balaifara mada kitas fervuba"              # How can I not try
		"Mada asar fenocasar Kuwaru hirlla"          # I'd forget the Quarg to
		"Bepanih werim senafir asar bepr"           # Switching genders would be worth

> # Band names come from the human band list.

Author: No, because they're written in the Korath Exile language. Even if Endless Sky had an English to Indonesian translation built in, and a connection to the cipher, you still need some manual tweaking to get the words to look right.

> # Band names come from the human band list.

Author: The `utils/korath-cipher.py` documents all of this. Although it is an executable script, most of the file is an explanation of the translation process, including the human component, which is most of the work. The script just automates the error-prone cipher.

> # Band names come from the human band list.

Reviewer 3: Yea, I was wondering about the creation of the band names and forgot to consider then translating it.

		"Raiakrabfec Svranc"           # Planck Massacre

# This is probably not what Korath actually eat, but it's what I
# imagine them eating if they were in our place in history on Earth.

phrase "exile: eat good food"
	word
		"ila'ikri"                     # digest
		"rameref"                      # ingest
		"i'fo'rutnref"                 # consume
		"bapamef"                      # devour
		"ikaftir"                      # enjoy
		"rataf"                        # dine on
		"pagronref"                    # munch on
		"raofavleb"                    # banquet
		"pagronref"                    # masticate
		"kininnref"                    # nibble
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: good food"

phrase "efreti: eat good food"
	word
		"ipamikri"                     # digest
		"raneref"                      # ingest
		"imfomruslref"                 # consume
		"cahanef"                      # devour
		"ikafsir"                      # enjoy
		"rasaf"                        # dine on
		"hadrolref"                    # munch on
		"raofawpec"                    # banquet
		"hadrolref"                    # masticate
		"kilillref"                    # nibble
	word
		" "
	word

> 		"atanem oawih aok palem"       # fresh dark green lettuce

Reviewer 2: Calamari and space slugs again

```suggestion
		"ukkumip ifov"                 # squid risotto
		"roafap rat iabav ifov"        # herb and chili calamari
		"akmac akrik ifov-ifov"        # squid ink pasta
		"ifov lrepul"                  # fried calamari
		"kocislraop ralret edrapu"     # space slug with orange
		"cihav kocislraop lripes"      # dried space slug chips
		"atanem oawih aok palem"       # fresh dark green lettuce
```

		"lrabfos satab hadrep"         # crunchy rhino beetles
		"ipebupkm palem lrad lrakaf"   # ripe succulent strawberries
		"tuv lrallrac ralret lragab hikoc"  # baked cod with garlic

> 		"kenniy enum lrallrac"         # baked sole fillet
> 		"mmab koan inihv"              # Chilean Sea Bass
> 		"rasi it maka makpes"          # fish en papillote
> 		"runef robfe otaf"             # honeydew melons
> 		"neca akmec lrad hadrep"       # crisp gala apples
> 		"oban lriros lravriv monah"    # finely chopped yellow squash
> 		"igam oawih kopac"             # shredded collard greens

Reviewer 2: Deleting four items from each list to show some variation between the two cultures and compensate for the six I added.

```suggestion
		"rasi it maka makpes"          # fish en papillote
		"neca akmec lrad hadrep"       # crisp gala apples
		"oban lriros lravriv monah"    # finely chopped yellow squash
```

		"kano cotih lrad kainellref"   # live squirming mealworms
		"soslrafem arpan lrivav lranel" # a bowlful of hornworm larvae
		"hoponem irunus kofem"         # an entire ant colony
		"rasocfok pameb lrivav rinin"  # a big heaping pile of waxworms
		"lrapam ponek lropob akro"     # a nest of ostrich eggs
		"idab mosik rilrit ralret ramaih" # chilled baby mice with garnish
		"akmac pano nives ralret umsab lravriv" # a pasta of small snakes with mice meatballs

> phrase "exile: Recently"

Reviewer 3: I feel like this whole section may be running afoul of the sense of time stuff? @ravenshining ?

		"painbush n paint"         # Paintbrushes and paint (mispronounced)
		"musik'l instr'mats"       # Musical instruments (mispronounced)
		"dr'm set"                 # Drum set (mispronounced)
		"Mosart musaic"            # Mozart music (mispronounced)
		"tess set's"               # chess sets (mispronounced)
		"fingre paint'n k't"       # finger-painting kit (mispronounced)
		"all yer operas"           # all of your operas (mispronounced)
		"sonettes n haukus"        # sonnets and haikus (mispronounced)
		"color'd pencals"          # colored pencils (mispronounced)
		"buulk fabr'c"             # bulk fabric (mispronounced)
		"strang instraments"       # string instruments (mispronounced)
		"rok gittar"               # rock guitar (mispronounced)

# These are items that make you wonder what strange things happen
# among the Korath that make them ask for this.
phrase "exile humanika: strange items"
	word
		"kit'ns"                   # Kittens  (mispronounced)
		"Hoy ac'rn cookees"        # Hai acorn cookies (mispronounced)
		"toilat pepper"            # Toilet paper (mispronounced)
		"geko"                     # Gecko (mispronounced)

> 		"Dund'gns en Sheragi"      # Dungeons and Sheragi (mispronounced)

Reviewer 3: I think we can go one better while preserving the clarity of the reference. Typical spoof queue here is "location and threat" (or vice versa) with the same starting letters. "Bunkers and Badasses," "Ogres and Oubliettes," and "Monsters and Mazes" all come to mind, though I know I've seen more.

I like using Sheragi as direct sub for dragon a lot as well, so how about something like:

Stockades and Sheragi?
Spaceports and Sheragi?
Sheragi and Starbases?
Sheragi and Shipyards?

We could perhaps break the location pattern and go with "Saryds and Sheragi"/"Saryds and Sheragi"?

Reviewer 3: That does sound good, yea :)

> 		"Bondl's Fontr'z: tee Fire Lizards" # Boundless Frontiers: the Fire Lizards (mispronounced)

Reviewer 3: Ah, my bad on this one, I was thinking of Galactic Civilizations. I like the change here regardless though :)

		"tuv lrallrac ralret lragab hikoc"  # baked cod with garlic
		"rasi it maka makpes"          # fish en papillote
		"neca akmec lrad hadrep"       # crisp gala apples
		"oban lriros lravriv monah"    # finely chopped yellow squash
		"kano cotih lrad kainellref"   # live squirming mealworms
		"soslrafem arpan lrivav lranel" # a bowlful of hornworm larvae
		"hoponem irunus kofem"         # an entire ant colony
		"rasocfok pameb lrivav rinin"  # a big heaping pile of waxworms
		"lrapam ponek lropob akro"     # a nest of ostrich eggs
		"idab mosik rilrit ralret ramaih" # chilled baby mice with garnish
		"akmac pano nives ralret umsab lravriv" # a pasta of small snakes with mice meatballs

phrase "exile: To better myself"
	word
		"Tokro itiahlebfef ilis"      # to better myself
		"Tokro 'akimaosiqisri aga'"   # for my individuality,
		"Gkie'bi ektisref acpah"      # ipseity dictated that [I]
		"Tokro ranrare'et"            # for [pleasure|freedom of thought]
		"Kimot nralu aok aga'"        # for my parents' [dead skin|legacy]

phrase "efreti: To better myself"
	word
		"Sokro isiabpecfef ipit"      # to better myself
		"Sokro makinaotiritri adam"   # for my individuality

> 		"Dkiemci eksitref aghab"      # ipseity dictated that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		"Dkiemci eksitref aghab"      # ipseity dictated that [I]
```

Or vice versa, so they match.

		"ratotam map nrag lareh."         # do the right thing.
		"ilaf akit bosip."                # let us live.
		"ratkafame' ifat."                # spare us.
		"ratlaih ifat 'aheh."             # let us free.
		"nrahlek okineh ava'."            # just fly away.

# # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #

# No phrases accessed directly by hails below this line                       #

# # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #

phrase "exile humanika: If you board our ship, then"
	word
		"Yoo bored us"         # You board us (mispronounced)
		"Board to"             # Board [us] to (mispronounced)
		"Come'n onbod"         # Come in onboard (mispronounced)
		"No you git unbod"     # No, you get onboard (mispronounced)
		"Ova when boad"        # It will be over for you when you board us (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: we will win the boarding mission"
	word
		"kil ur marins"        # kill your marines (mispronounced)
		"burn yuu up"          # burn you up (mispronounced)
		"eat yoo skin"         # eat your skin (mispronounced)
		"mak bon piles"        # make piles of your bones (mispronounced)

> 		"to ape meet"          # turn you into ape meat (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: Apes and monkeys are especially foreign to Korath

```suggestion
		"to ape meet"          # turn you into ape meat (mispronounced)
```

phrase "exile humanika: you will lose the boarding mission"
	word
		"yoo looose"           # you will lose (mispronounced)
		"yoo ded mor"          # you dead more (mispronounced)
		"die so die"           # die so die (What does this mean?)
		"lose yoo crewe"       # lose your crew (mispronounced)
		"no crew leff"         # no crew left (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: Your ship sucks."
	phrase
		"exile humanika: Your ship or its contents or attributes"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: are inferior to what we possess"
		"exile humanika: are sub-par by any reasonable standards"
	phrase

> 		"exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"exile mixed: , you inferior beings"
```

		"exile: empty phrase"
	word
		"."

phrase "exile humanika: Your ship sucks."
	phrase
		"exile humanika: Your ship or its contents or attributes"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: are inferior to what we possess"
		"exile humanika: are sub-par by any reasonable standards"
	phrase

> 		"exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"exile mixed: , you inferior beings"
```

		"exile: empty phrase"
	word
		"."

phrase "exile humanika: We are better than you."
	phrase
		"exile humanika: Our ship or its contents or attributes"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: are superior to what you possess"
		"exile humanika: are above par by any reasonable standards"
	phrase

> 		"exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"exile mixed: , you inferior beings"
```

		"be sit"             # is [epithet for fecal matter] (mispronounced)
		"dust'n wurk"        # doesn't work (mispronounced)
		"ain' gud"           # ain't good (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: are above par by any reasonable standards"
	word
		"'s amazin"          # is amazing (mispronounced)
		"do gud"             # [do|does] good (mispronounced)
		"werks wall"         # works well (mispronounced)
		"snassy"             # [snazzy|sassy] (mispronounced)
		"hi tek"             # [is] high tech (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: are inferior to what we possess"
	word
		"les ours"           # [is] less [than] ours (mispronounced)
		"smalrn oars"        # [is] smaller than ours (mispronounced)
		"week thin me"       # [is] weaker than me (mispronounced)

phrase "exile humanika: are superior to what you possess"
	word
		"be'ren yurs"        # [is] better than yours (mispronounced)
		"bigger yers"        # [is] bigger than yours (mispronounced)
		"ston thin you"      # [is] stronger than [you|yours] (mispronounced)

phrase "exile: empty phrase"
	word
		""

phrase "exile mixed: , you inferior [individual|species]"
	word
		", "
	phrase

> 		"exile humanika: you inferior species"
> 		"exile humanika: you inferior individual"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"exile humanika: you inferior beings"
```

> phrase "exile humanika: you inferior species"
> 	word
> 		"yuu beeg apes"       # You big apes (mispronounced)
> 		"humanika dren"       # human dren (mispronounced)
> 		"ugli munkys"         # ugly monkeys (mispronounced)
> 		"weeeeek speeeces"    # weak species (mispronounced)
> 
> phrase "exile humanika: you inferior individual"
> 	word
> 		"yoo ugli foo"        # You ugly fool (mispronounced)
> 		"skinlis munky"       # Skinless monkey (mispronounced)
> 		"ugli halching"       # Ugly hatchling (mispronounced)
> 		"yer've humpd corp's" # you have performed an [epithet for having performed an act of procreation] with a corpse (mispronounced)

Reviewer 2: Removing monkey/ape references, and merging these categories that aren't used independently anyway.

```suggestion
phrase "exile humanika: you inferior beings"
	word
		"humanika dren"       # human dren (mispronounced)
		"weeeeek speeeces"    # weak species (mispronounced)
		"yoo ugli foo"        # You ugly fool (mispronounced)
		"ugli halching"       # Ugly hatchling (mispronounced)
		"yer've humpd corp's" # you have performed explicit actions with a corpse (mispronounced)
```

phrase "hostile disabled korath untranslated"
	phrase
		"exile: loud angry rambling" 150
		"exile humanika: If you board us, we will win." 100
		"exile mixed: request for mercy" 100
		"exile mixed: Please don't do terrible things to us while we are disabled." 50

phrase "friendly korath untranslated"
	phrase
		"exile: miscellaneous rambling" 100
		"exile mixed: bragging about tech" 50

phrase "friendly disabled korath untranslated"
	phrase
		"exile: miscellaneous rambling" 100
		"exile: we are disabled, please help us" 50

phrase "hostile kor efret untranslated"
	phrase
		"efreti: loud angry rambling" 150
		"efreti: threatening warning about being protected" 50

phrase "hostile disabled kor efret untranslated"
	phrase
		"efreti: loud angry rambling" 100
		"efreti: threatening warning about being protected" 100

phrase "friendly kor efret untranslated"
	phrase
		"efreti: miscellaneous rambling" 150
		"efreti: friendly warning about being protected" 50

phrase "friendly disabled kor efret untranslated"
	phrase
		"efreti: we are disabled, please help us" 200
		"efreti: miscellaneous rambling" 50
		"efreti: friendly warning about being protected" 50

> # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #
> 
> # No top-level phrases below this line.                                       #
> 
> # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Subphrases:
```

phrase "exile humanika: If you board us, we will win."
	phrase
		"exile humanika: If you board our ship, then"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: we will win the boarding mission"
		"exile humanika: you will lose the boarding mission"
	phrase
		"exile mixed:, you inferior beings"
		"exile: empty phrase"
	word

> 		". "

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"."
```

		"exile humanika: We are better than you."

phrase "exile humanika: cargo demands"
	phrase
		"exile humanika: You will give us [cargo] and we will let you live."
		"exile humanika: All of your [cargo] is ours now."

phrase "exile humanika: general threats"
	phrase
		"exile humanika: You will lose this fight."
		"exile humanika: Nobody can defeat the Korath."

phrase "exile mixed: cargo demands"
	phrase
		"exile mixed: You will give us"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile mixed: food"
		"exile mixed: raw materials"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile mixed: and we will let you live."

phrase "exile humanika: oddly specific demands"
	phrase
		"exile humanika: You will give us"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: cultural items" 10
		"exile humanika: strange items" 3
		"exile humanika: open source games" 3
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile humanika: and we will let you live."

phrase "exile mixed: bragging about tech"
	phrase
		"exile: Our ship's"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: weapons" 7
		"exile: engines" 5
		"exile: systems" 5
		"exile humanika: systems" 12
		"exile humanika: engines" 12
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: [system] is snazzy" 7
		"exile: [system] is better than yours" 4
	word

> 		.
> 		.
> 		.
> 		!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"." 3
		"!"
```

# two they heard before to say, "Don't gas us!"
phrase "exile mixed: Please don't do terrible things to us while we are disabled."
	word
		"'uu shud" 3    # You should (mispronounced)
		"Can hav" 3     # Can have (mispronounced)
		"'oo wil" 3     # You will (mispronounced)
		"Most yuu" 3    # Must you (mispronounced)

		"Ratami'"                # Please
		"Asra 'olap"             # You should
		"Bati'leh tiah ras"      # Be kind and
		"Rattovroref ratiahet:"  # Show kindness:
	word
		" "
	word
		"'oo merve gas." 4  # no nerve gas (mispronounced)
		"'o nerf gus." 4    # no nerve gas (mispronounced)
		"no ga'as us." 4    # no gas us (mispronounced)
		"nerf gas no." 4    # nerve gas no (mispronounced)

		"ranrav rataron 'an jala'."       # do not use nerve gas.
		"ranrav 'an ifat."                # do not gas us.
		"ikrepleh. Ifat rata irobfanref." # stop. We would spare you.
		"ratotam map nrag lareh."         # do the right thing.
		"ilaf akit bosip."                # let us live.
		"ratkafame' ifat."                # spare us.
		"ratlaih ifat 'aheh."             # let us free.
		"nrahlek okineh ava'."            # just fly away.

> # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #
> 
> # No phrases accessed directly by hails below this line                       #
> 
> # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # #

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Phrase building blocks:
```

		"Somoref atra mopah pihsapeb lrapasem"        # Your [poking|ineffectual attack] should stop now

# The powerful faction probably won't intervene, but it is a
# believable threat that may scare away would-be attackers.

phrase "efreti: because we are protected by (Insert Powerful Faction Name Here)."
	word
		"fonebem Drak ofhorobfef."               # before the Drak kill you.
		"oaka Kuwaru rasa ipavref ofnawa."       # or the Quarg will seek your doom.
		"ralraw iacfam Kuwaru rasa lrakat."      # lest the Quarg come.
		"sokro ipatrihlref sabfuk kilran."       # to avoid the Sky Lances
		"arepas Kuwaru hanata apatoam akis."     # because the Quarg are our siblings
		"oaka atra rasa itawref Kuwaru naim."    # or you will be Quarg dung.
		"arepas Kuwaru ilrotrinef akis."         # because [the] Quarg protect us
		"ralraw iacfam ipekafikra ipihsalref."   # lest antimatter [which powers Quarg ships] end [you]
		"sokro ipatrihlref ramanabfec Kuwaru."   # to avoid a Quarg's vengeance

phrase "exile: I do bad things to my enemies"
	phrase
		"exile: I perform harmful acts upon"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: people who offend, attack, or oppress me"
	word

> 		.
> 		.
> 		!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"." 2
		"!"
```

phrase "efreti: I do bad things to my enemies"
	phrase
		"efreti: I perform harmful acts upon"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"efreti: people who offend, attack, or oppress me"
	word

> 		.
> 		.
> 		!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"." 2
		"!"
```

		"Af'amb rata ratto'afef asra."          # The plasma [from my guns] will subsume you.

phrase "efreti: You are the next person that will have something bad happen to them."
	word
		"Nikmati tarian terakhirmu!"                 # Enjoy your final dance!
		"Rasakas osatac ofrarilries."                # Tell me your [ dying wish | final memory ].
		"Hasaca ata kapihsa Humanika?"               # Is there a human afterlife?
		"Dewa Anda tidak dapat membantu Anda!"       # Your gods can't help you [now]!
		"Hasrasa akis idradrpeb afampeb it kapihsa?" # Will we sing together in the afterlife?
		"Tevenref rapalafet rekubfi asra!"           # I mock your impotent rage!
		"Rasosanef raipak raikafes!"                 # [You will] do the dance of death!
		"Kulit anda akan dilupakan."                 # Your skin will be forgotten.
		"Osa rasa kahafef ofraikafes."               # I will make a sculpture of your demise.
		"Sara-sara rasagakperef ranicfapekes atra."  # [Our] children laugh at your [terrible piloting] skills.

phrase "exile: I like to do things"
	phrase
		"exile: I like to"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: listen to (Band)"
		"exile: eat good food"
	word

> 		.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"."
```

phrase "efreti: I like to do things"
	phrase
		"efreti: I like to"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"efreti: listen to (Band)"
		"efreti: eat good food"
	word

> 		.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"."
```

phrase "exile: I learned to do things"
	phrase
		"exile: To better myself"
		"exile: For the community"
	word
		", "
	phrase
		"exile: i learned | practiced | taught"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"exile: artistic or musical skill"
		"exile: practical skill"
	word

> 		.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"."
```

phrase "efreti: I learned to do things"
	phrase
		"efreti: To better myself"
		"efreti: For the community"
	word
		", "
	phrase
		"efreti: i learned | practiced | taught"
	word
		" "
	phrase
		"efreti: artistic or musical skill"
		"efreti: practical skill"
	word

> 		.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
		"."
```

		"adam pawalref"                # i taught
		"adam rasaf ranicfapekes"      # i ate the skill
		"adam rasaf raohakelrec obi"   # i ate mother's knowledge
		"kinos hada ipebfef adam"      # father's skin gave me
		"adam rasaf pekmaf"            # i ate a master's

# Korath probably don't have this exact music and art, but I chose
# music with a low pitch, so they'd be able to hear it well.

phrase "exile: artistic or musical skill"
	word
		"ramibfaleket riafleh ummed"         # cello playing skills
		"katah 'ah fols"                     # bass drumming talent
		"katah ahok nrag laom a'aih"         # terrific tuba talent
		"i'i'ubfut ruu'ahalkrut nrag tilaref"  # catchy contrabassoon composition
		"iefuupt nrag kanra' 'iruflap"       # perfectly harmonious khoomei (Tuva throat singing)
		"zavvakat nrag nrimab mibfalek"      # the most skilled katajjaq (Intuit throat singing)
		"lriyee lrad kalram hatri"           # divinely beautiful eefing (Xhosa throat singing)
		"Far Upugf Enrel Ugt"                # Nam Myoho Renge Kyo (Buddhist religious chant)
		"Fu A Al Ab Ad Ar Pips"              # Om A Ra Pa Ca Na Dhih (Buddhist religious chant)

> 		"i'i'ubfut onam dimesepdg'b-k'ub"    # post-psychedelic song composition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"i'i'ubfut onam dimesepdgi'ib-ko'ub"    # post-psychedelic song composition
```

		"abaleheh ukle'rut uhu"              # several oboe concertos
		"nrokab 'islo'ha tikerit"            # kinetic absurdist sculpture
		"ralito ivanlen lebip 'ik'imael"     # hyper-realistic chainsaw carving
		"nrokab ranravrameket tiulep"        # heroic nudity sculpting
		"nrokab tulah nrag 'ifaris"          # dynamic boroque sculpture

> 		"nrokab ire' parak 'irlesuf-k'ub"    # post-modernist land art sculpture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		"nrokab ire' parak 'irlesuf-ko'ub"    # post-modernist land art sculpture
```
